---
title: "Making a GitHub Pages hosted blog site with Hugo and Blowfish"
date: 2026-01-27
draft: true
tags: ["Hugo", "Blowfish"]
---

## Introduction

In this post I'm going to detail the steps I followed to create this blog site using Hugo using the very flexible Blowfish theme. By the end of this guide, you will have a fully functional blog site that is easy to maintain and customize.

I spent a bit of time looking at different static site generators, but Hugo stood out due to its speed, ease of use, and extensive documentation. The Blowfish theme caught my eye because of its design and flexibility and like Hugo, it has great documentation!

Before we go further here are the links to both [Hugo](https://gohugo.io/) and the [Blowfish](https://blowfish.page/) theme.  You can find the full documenatation for both sites at those links.

## Prerequisites

You will need to download and install some tools before you can get started.  This guide is not intended to be the definitive set of instructions for this step. It will depend on your operating system, how you want to install the theme and how you will be hosting the site.  I'm on Windows and I'm using GitHub to host the repository and GitHub Pages to host the site.  Both the Hugo and Blowfish docs are excellent and will guide you through the installation steps for your specific environment.

> [!NOTE]
> The Hugo docs say to use Powershell rather than Windows Powershell. I tend to use Powershell all the time so can't say if you will run into problems using Windows PowerShell or not. Probably best to follow the docs on this one. 

### Create a GitHub Account

If you don't already have a GitHub account you will need to create one.  You can do this by going to [GitHub](https://github.com/) and signing up for a free account.

### Install Hugo

The easiest way to install Hugo on Windows is to use Winget.

```powershell
winget install Hugo.Hugo.Extended
```

You can check that Hugo is installed correctly by running:

```powershell
hugo version
```

### Install Git

While Git isn't strictly required to create a Hugo site it is very useful for managing your site files and installing themes like Blowfish.  It can also be intalled using Winget.

```powershell
winget install --id Git.Git -e --source winget
```

You will need to setup Git with your GitHub account.  The following links shows how to do this:<br>
[Setting your Git username](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/git-basics/setting-your-username-in-git#setting-your-git-username-for-every-repository-on-your-computer)<br>
[Setting your commit email address](https://docs.github.com/en/account-and-profile/how-tos/email-preferences/setting-your-commit-email-address#setting-your-commit-email-address-in-git)

### Not necessary but recommended

You may want to install a code editor like [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) to make editing your site files easier.<br>
You can also use a custom domain name if you have one. I'll cover that at the end.

## Creating a new Hugo site

Now that you have all the prerequisites installed you can create a new Hugo site.  Open a terminal window and navigate to the folder where you want to create your site.  The Hugo CLI will create a folder named the same as your new site. Run the following command to create a new Hugo site, replace `mynewsite` with the name you want to use for your site:

```powershell
hugo new site mynewsite
```
Next navigate into the new site folder:

```powershell
cd mynewsite
```
You should now see a basic folder structure for your Hugo site.  It should look something like this:

```
mynewsite
├── archetypes
|   └── default.md
├── themes
├── content
├── data
├── i18n
├── layouts
├── static
└── hugo.toml
```

Initialize a new Git repository:

```powershell
git init
```
Make sure your branch is set to `main`:

```powershell
git branch -M main
```
Create a `.gitignore` file in the root of your project folder and add the following lines to it:

```
/public/
/resources/
```
These two folders are generated by Hugo when you build your site and don't need to be tracked in Git or pushed to your remote repository.

### Installing the Blowfish theme

You can install the Blowfish theme by cloning the repository into the themes folder of your Hugo site. Run the following command:

```powershell
git submodule add -b main https://github.com/nunocoracao/blowfish.git themes/blowfish
```
> [!NOTE]
> This is one way to install the Blowfish theme. There are others including a a CLI tool you can use to initialize a new Hugo site with the Blowfish theme already installed. See the [Blowfish documentation](https://blowfish.page/docs/installation/) for more details.

### Connecting your project to GitHub

If you are using GitHub Pages to host your site you will need to create a new repository on GitHub. Name the repository something like `mynewsite.github.io`. Choose not to create a README.md in the new repository. You can now add the remote repository to your local Git repository:

```powershell
git remote add origin https://github.com/<your-username>/mynewsite.github.io
```
Commit your changes:
```powershell
git add -A
git commit -m "Initial commit"
```
Finally, push your changes to GitHub:
```powershell
git push -u origin main
```

## Configuring the Blowfish theme

From here in you will find it easier to do this in your code editor. I'm using Visual Studio Code.  Open the project folder in your code editor.<br>

### Configure Hugo to use the Blowfish theme

In the root of your project folder you will find a file named `hugo.toml`. Delete this file.  Navigate to the `themes/blowfish/` folder and copy the folder called `config`.  Paste this folder into the root of your project folder. Inside the `config` folder you will find a folder named `_default` which contains all the toml configuration files for the theme:
```powershell
config
└── _default
    ├── hugo.toml
    ├── languages.en.toml
    ├── markup.toml
    ├── menus.en.toml
    ├── module.toml
    └── params.toml
```
These files contain all the Blowfish configuration options which you can use to customise your site.  I'm not going to go through an exhaustive explanation of every option as there a lot of them. I'm just highlighting the steps I took to get my site how I wanted it. You can find the full documentation [here](https://blowfish.page/docs/configuration/).

### Configure hugo.toml

Open `hugo.toml` and update the following settings to match your site:

```toml
theme = "blowfish" # UNCOMMENT THIS LINE
baseURL = "https://mynewsite.github.io/" # UNCOMMENT AND UPDATE THIS LINE (USE YOUR OWN URL)
defaultContentLanguage = "en" # Set this to the language you want to use
```

### Configure languages.en.toml

Open `languages.en.toml`. If your site is in English the file is usable as is. If your language is different you will need rename the file to match your language code and update the settings inside the file. refer to the documentation for more details on this.

Set the `title` options to match your site title then uncomment the `[params.author]` section and update with the details you want to use.

```toml
[params.author]
  name = "Paul McCormack"
#   email = "youremail@example.com"
  image = "img/blowfish_logo.png"
  imageQuality = 96
  headline = "This is my site about making a site with Hugo and Blowfish!"
#   bio = "A little bit about you"
```
> [!TIP]+ Use your social profile picture!
> You can use your socials profile picture to save storing an image in your site. Just set the `image` option to the URL of your profile picture.

If you want to include links to your social profiles uncomment the relevant lines in the `links` section and update the urls:

```toml
  links = [
#     { email = "mailto:hello@your_domain.com" },
#     { link = "https://link-to-some-website.com/" },
    { github = "https://github.com/paul-mccormack/" },
    { linkedin = "https://www.linkedin.com/in/paul-mccormack-08b04a6/" },
  ] # Scroll down to the bottom of the file and uncomment this line also
```
### Configure menus.en.toml

This file allows you to configure the menu for your site. In it's simplest form the menu is built by using a `name` and `pageRef` for each menu item. They will be displayed alphabetically but you can control the order by adding a `weight` option.  The example below shows a simple menu with a home link, a posts link and an about me link.

```toml
[[main]]
  name = "Home"
  pageRef = "index"
  weight = 1

[[main]]
  name = "Posts"
  pageRef = "posts"
  weight = 2

[[main]]
  name = "About Me"
  pageRef = "about"
  weight = 3
```
Home uses the index pageRef, this will take you to the home page of your site. Posts links to a section called posts.<br>
The About Me pageref links to a page called `about.md`. You don't need to provide the file extension.<br>

Your menu structure should reflect the structure of your content folder. I'll go into detail on that later in the guide.

### Configure params.toml

This config file holds the options to configure the look and feel of your site.  Blowfish is hugely flexible with way too many options to cover here but I'll call out a few of the key settings I changed to get this site looking how I wanted it.  You can the full docs [here](https://blowfish.page/docs/configuration/#theme-parameters).

#### Colour Scheme

Tjhe first section is where you can set the colour scheme.  Blowfish has a range of built in schemes which all look great. You can choose a default appearance of dark or light modes and enable automatic switching based on the user's system preferences.

```toml
colorScheme = "blowfish"
defaultAppearance = "dark" # valid options: light or dark
autoSwitchAppearance = true
```

#### Recent posts

Blowfish allows you to show recent posts on the home page.  You might have a section of your site you want to exclude from this list.  You can control this with the `mainSections` setting.  For example you might have a posts section and a projects section but only want content from posts to appear in this list.  Uncomment this setting and update it to match what you want to show.

```toml
mainSections = ["posts"]
```

#### Table of Contents

These next three settings make your articles look amazing! Slightly jumping ahead here.  Your articles are written in Markdown.  You can use markdown headings to create section and sub-sections in your articles.  In Markdown it look like this:

```markdown
# This is a main heading (H1)
## This is a sub-heading (H2)
### This is a sub-sub-heading (H3)
```
Blowfish can automatically generate a table of contents for your article based on these headings, you have to enable by setting `showTableOfContents = true` in the `[article]` section of your params.toml file. You can take this to next level of awesome by enabling `highlightCurrentMenuArea = true` and `smartTOC = true`. This moves the table of contents into a side panel and highlights the current section on the screen as you scroll through the article. It looks really professional and makes it easy for readers to navigate your content.

#### Home page settings

The `[homepage]` section is where you configure how the home page will appear.  The most impactful setting here is `layout`.  Blowfish has serveral built in layout options. The default is `profile` but you can choose `page`, `hero`, `card`, `background` or `custom` and create your own html and css to get exactly what you want. Experiment with these options to what suits your site best.

You can also control recents and if you want to show thumbnail card pictures for recent posts. More on that later.

#### Article settings.

This section allows you to configure a default style for your articles. You can control things like showing the creation date, last date updated, author name, reading time and word count.  These can all be overridden on a per article basis by setting front matter in your markdown files. I'll cover that later.

## Testing your site locally

With the basic configuration complete you can now test your site locally.  Hugo has a built-in server that you can use to preview your site.  In your terminal window run the following command:

```powershell
hugo server --disableFastRender --noHTTPCache
```
This will start the Hugo server and you should see output similar to this:

```
Start building sites …
hugo v0.154.5-a6f99cca223a29cad1d4cdaa6a1a90508ac1da71+extended windows/amd64 BuildDate=2026-01-11T20:53:23Z VendorInfo=gohugoio


                  │ EN
──────────────────┼────
 Pages            │ 14
 Paginator pages  │  0
 Non-page files   │  0
 Static files     │  7
 Processed images │  2
 Aliases          │  0
 Cleaned          │  0

Built in 1979 ms
Environment: "development"
Serving pages from disk
Web Server is available at http://localhost:1313/ (bind address 127.0.0.1)
Press Ctrl+C to stop
```

Open your web browser and navigate to `http://localhost:1313/` to see your site in action.  You can make changes to your site files and the server will automatically reload the site to reflect your changes.

## Creating and managing content

